The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sonnets and Verse, by Hilaire Belloc

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Sonnets and Verse

Author: Hilaire Belloc

Release Date: November 10, 2019 [EBook #60663]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONNETS AND VERSE ***




Produced by Tim Lindell, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









                           SONNETS AND VERSE

                                  BY

                               H. BELLOC




                           SONNETS AND VERSE

                                  BY

                               H. BELLOC

                       [Illustration: colophon]

                            DUCKWORTH & CO.
                   3 HENRIETTA STREET, LONDON, W.C.


                       _First Published in 1923_

                         _All rights reserved_


                  _Made and Printed in Great Britain
                   by Turnbull & Spears, Edinburgh_




                                  To

                      JOHN SWINNERTON PHILLIMORE

                             A DEDICATION

                        WITH THIS BOOK OF VERSE


    _When you and I were little tiny boys_
      _We took a most impertinent delight_
    _In foolish, painted and misshapen toys_
      _Which hidden mothers brought to us at night._

    _Do you that have the child’s diviner part--_
      _The dear content a love familiar brings--_
    _Take these imperfect toys, till in your heart_
      _They too attain the form of perfect things._




CONTENTS


I. SONNETS

                                                                    PAGE

I. LIFT UP YOUR HEARTS IN GUMBER, LAUGH
THE WEALD                                                              3

II. I WAS LIKE ONE THAT KEEPS THE DECK BY NIGHT                        4

III. RISE UP AND DO BEGIN THE DAY’S ADORNING                           5

IV. THE WINTER MOON HAS SUCH A QUIET CAR                               6

V. WHATEVER MOISTURE NOURISHES THE ROSE                                7

VI. YOUTH GAVE YOU TO ME, BUT I’LL NOT BELIEVE                         8

VII. MORTALITY IS BUT THE STUFF YOU WEAR                               9

VIII. NOT FOR THE LUCKLESS BUDS OUR ROOTS MAY BEAR                    10

IX. THAT WHICH IS ONE THEY SHEAR AND MAKE IT TWAIN                    11

X. SHALL ANY MAN FOR WHOSE STRONG LOVE ANOTHER                        12

XI. THEY THAT HAVE TAKEN WAGES OF THINGS DONE                         13

XII. BEAUTY THAT PARENT IS TO DEATHLESS RHYME                         14

XIII. WHAT ARE THE NAMES FOR BEAUTY? WHO SHALL PRAISE                 15

XIV. LOVE WOOING HONOUR, HONOUR’S LOVE DID WIN                        16

XV. YOUR LIFE IS LIKE A LITTLE WINTER’S DAY                           17

XVI. NOW SHALL THE CERTAIN PURPOSE OF MY SOUL                         18

XVII. BECAUSE MY FALTERING FEET MAY FAIL TO DARE                      19

XVIII. WHEN YOU TO ACHERON’S UGLY WATER COME                          20

XIX. WE WILL NOT WHISPER, WE HAVE FOUND THE PLACE                     21

XX. I WENT TO SLEEP AT DAWN IN TUSCANY                                22

XXI. ALMIGHTY GOD, WHOSE JUSTICE LIKE A SUN                           23

XXII. MOTHER OF ALL MY CITIES ONCE THERE LAY                          24

XXIII. NOVEMBER IS THAT HISTORIED EMPEROR                             25

XXIV. HOAR TIME ABOUT THE HOUSE BETAKES HIM SLOW                      26

XXV. IT FREEZES: ALL ACROSS A SOUNDLESS SKY                           27

XXVI. O MY COMPANION, O MY SISTER SLEEP                               28

XXVII. ARE YOU THE END, DESPAIR, OR THE POOR LEAST                    29

XXVIII. BUT OH! NOT LOVELY HELEN, NOR THE PRIDE                       30

XXIX. THE WORLD’S A STAGE. THE LIGHT IS IN ONE’S EYES                 31

XXX. THE WORLD’S A STAGE--AND I’M THE SUPER MAN                       32

XXXI. THE WORLD’S A STAGE. THE TRIFLING ENTRANCE FEE                  33


II.   LYRICAL, DIDACTIC AND GROTESQUE

TO DIVES                                                              37

STANZAS WRITTEN ON BATTERSEA BRIDGE DURING A SOUTH-WESTERLY GALE      39

THE SOUTH COUNTRY                                                     42

THE FANATIC                                                           45

THE EARLY MORNING                                                     48

OUR LORD AND OUR LADY                                                 49

COURTESY                                                              51

THE NIGHT                                                             53

THE LEADER                                                            54

A BIVOUAC                                                             56

TO THE BALLIOL MEN STILL IN AFRICA                                    57

VERSES TO A LORD WHO, IN THE HOUSE OF LORDS,
SAID THAT THOSE WHO OPPOSED THE SOUTH AFRICAN
ADVENTURE CONFUSED SOLDIERS WITH MONEY-GRUBBERS                       59

THE REBEL                                                             61

THE PROPHET LOST IN THE HILLS AT EVENING                              63

THE END OF THE ROAD                                                   65

AN ORACLE THAT WARNED THE WRITER WHEN ON PILGRIMAGE                   67

THE DEATH AND LAST CONFESSION OF WANDERING PETER                      68

DEDICATORY ODE                                                        70

DEDICATION ON THE GIFT OF A BOOK TO A CHILD                           78

DEDICATION OF A CHILD’S BOOK OF IMAGINARY TALES                       79

HOMAGE                                                                80

THE MOON’S FUNERAL                                                    81

THE HAPPY JOURNALIST                                                  83

LINES TO A DON                                                        85

NEWDIGATE POEM                                                        88

THE YELLOW MUSTARD                                                    93

THE POLITICIAN OR THE IRISH EARLDOM                                   94

THE LOSER                                                             96


III.   SONGS

NOËL                                                                  99

THE BIRDS                                                            101

IN A BOAT                                                            102

SONG INVITING THE INFLUENCE OF A YOUNG LADY UPON THE OPENING YEAR    104

THE RING                                                             105

CUCKOO!                                                              106

THE LITTLE SERVING MAID                                              107

AUVERGNAT                                                            110

DRINKING SONG, ON THE EXCELLENCE OF BURGUNDY
WINE                                                                 111

DRINKING DIRGE                                                       113

WEST SUSSEX DRINKING SONG                                            115

A BALLAD ON SOCIOLOGICAL ECONOMICS                                   117

HERETICS ALL                                                         118

HA’NACKER MILL                                                       119

TARANTELLA                                                           120

THE CHAUNTY OF THE “NONA”                                            122

THE WINGED HORSE                                                     125

STREPHON’S SONG (FROM “THE CRUEL SHEPHERDESS”)                       127


IV. BALLADES

SHORT BALLADE AND POSTSCRIPT ON CONSOLS AND BOERS                    131

BALLADE OF THE UNANSWERED QUESTION                                   134

BALLADE TO OUR LADY OF CZESTOCHOWA                                   136

BALLADE OF HELL AND OF MRS ROEBECK                                   138

BALLADE OF UNSUCCESSFUL MEN                                          140

BALLADE OF THE HERESIARCHS                                           142


V. EPIGRAMS                                                          147


VI. THE BALLAD OF VAL-ÈS-DUNES                                       157




I SONNETS


        I

    Lift up your hearts in Gumber, laugh the Weald
    And you my mother the Valley of Arun sing.
    Here am I homeward from my wandering
    Here am I homeward and my heart is healed.
    You my companions whom the World has tired
    Come out to greet me. I have found a face
    More beautiful than Gardens; more desired
    Than boys in exile love their native place.

    Lift up your hearts in Gumber, laugh the Weald
    And you most ancient Valley of Arun sing.
    Here am I homeward from my wandering,
    Here am I homeward and my heart is healed.
      If I was thirsty, I have heard a spring.
      If I was dusty, I have found a field.


II

    I was like one that keeps the deck by night
      Bearing the tiller up against his breast;
    I was like one whose soul is centred quite
      In holding course although so hardly prest,
    And veers with veering shock now left now right,
      And strains his foothold still and still makes play
    Of bending beams until the sacred light
      Shows him high lands and heralds up the day.

    But now such busy work of battle past
    I am like one whose barque at bar at last
    Comes hardly heeling down the adventurous breeze;
    And entering calmer seas,
    I am like one that brings his merchandise
    To Californian skies.


III

    Rise up and do begin the day’s adorning;
    The Summer dark is but the dawn of day.
    The last of sunset fades into the morning;
    The morning calls you from the dark away.
    The holy mist, the white mist of the morning
    Was wreathing upward on my lonely way.
    The way was waiting for your own adorning
    That should complete the broad adornéd day.

    Rise up and do begin the day’s adorning;
    The little eastern clouds are dapple grey:
    There will be wind among the leaves to-day;
    It is the very promise of the morning.
      _Lux Tua Via Mea_: your light’s my way--
      Then do rise up and make it perfect day.


IV

    The Winter Moon has such a quiet car
    That all the winter nights are dumb with rest.
    She drives the gradual dark with drooping crest
    And dreams go wandering from her drowsy star
    Because the nights are silent do not wake
    But there shall tremble through the general earth,
    And over you, a quickening and a birth.
    The Sun is near the hill-tops for your sake.

    The latest born of all the days shall creep
    To kiss the tender eyelids of the year;
    And you shall wake, grown young with perfect sleep,
    And smile at the new world and make it dear
      With living murmurs more than dreams are deep;
      Silence is dead, my dawn, the morning’s here.


        V

    Whatever moisture nourishes the Rose
    The Rose of the World in laughter’s garden-bed
    Where Souls of men on faith secure are fed
    And spirits immortal keep their pleasure-close.
    Whatever moisture nourishes the Rose,
    The burning Rose of the world, for me the same
    To-day for me the spring without a name
    Content or Grace or Laughter overflows.

    This is that water from the Fount of Gold
    Water of Youth and washer out of cares
    Which Raymond of Saragossa sought of old
    And finding in the mountain, unawares,
    Returned to hear an ancient story told
    To Bramimond, his love, beside the marble stairs.


VI

    Youth gave you to me, but I’ll not believe
    That Youth will, taking his quick self, take you.
    Youth’s all our Truth: he cannot so deceive.
    He has our graces, not our ownselves too.
    He still compares with time when he’ll be spent,
    By human doom enhancing what we are;
    Enriches us with rare experiment,
    Lends arms to leagured Age in Time’s rough war.

    Look! This Youth in us is an Old Man taking
    A Boy to make him wiser than his days.
    So is our old Youth our young Age’s making:
    So rich in time our final debt he pays.
      Then with your quite young arms do you me hold
      And I will still be young when all the World’s grown old.


VII

    Mortality is but the Stuff you wear
    To show the better on the imperfect sight.
    Your home is surely with the changeless light
    Of which you are the daughter and the heir.
    For as you pass, the natural life of things
    Proclaims the Resurrection: as you pass
    Remembered summer shines across the grass
    And somewhat in me of the immortal sings.

    You were not made for memory, you are not
    Youth’s accident I think but heavenly more;
    Moulding to meaning slips my pen’s poor blot
    And opening wide that long forbidden door
      Where stands the Mother of God, your exemplar.
      How beautiful, how beautiful you are!


VIII

    Not for the luckless buds our roots may bear
      Now all in bloom, now seared and cankered lying
    Will I entreat you, lest they should compare
      Foredoomed humanity with the fall of flowers.
    Hold thou with me the chaste communion rare
      And touch with life this mortal case of ours:
      You’re lifted up beyond the power of dying:
    I die, as bounded things die everywhere.

      You’re voiced companionship, I’m silence lonely;
    You’re stuff, I’m void; you’re living, I’m decay.
      I fall, I think, to-night and ending only;
    You rise, I know, through still advancing day.
      And knowing living gift were life for me
      In narrow room of rhyme I fixed it certainly.


IX

    That which is one they shear and make it twain
    Who would Love’s light and dark discriminate:
    His pleasure is one essence with his pain,
    Even his desire twin brother to his hate.
    With him the foiled attempt is half achieving;
    And being mastered, to be armed a lord;
    And doubting every chance is still believing;
    And losing all one’s own is all reward.

    I am acquainted with misfortune’s fortune,
    And better than herself her dowry know:
    For she that is my fortune and misfortune,
    Making me hapless, makes me happier so:
      In which conceit, as older men may prove,
      Lies manifest the very core of Love.


        X

    Shall any man for whose strong love another
      Has thrown away his wealth and name in one,
    Shall he turn mocker of a more than brother
      To slight his need when his adventure’s done?
    Or shall a breedless boy whose mother won him
      In great men’s great concerns his little place
    Turn when his farthing honours come upon him
      To mock her yeoman air and conscious grace?

    Then mock me as you do my narrow scope,
      For you it was put out this light of mine:
    Wrongfully wrecked my new adventured hope,
      Wasted my wordy wealth, spilt my rich wine,
    Made my square ship within a league of shore
      Alas! To be entombed in seas and seen no more.


XI

    They that have taken wages of things done
    When sense abused has blocked the doors of sense,
    They that have lost their heritage of the sun,
    Their laughter and their holy innocence;
    They turn them now to this thing, now to t’other,
    For anchor hold against swift-eddying time,
    Some to that square of earth which was their mother,
    And some to noisy fame, and some to rhyme.

    But I to that far morning where you stood
    In fullness of the body, with your hands
    Reposing on your walls, before your lands,
    And all, together, making one great good:
      Then did I cry “For this my birth was meant.
      These are my use, and this my sacrament!”


XII

    Beauty that Parent is to deathless Rhyme
    Was Manhood’s maker: you shall bear a Son,
    Till Daughters linked adown admiring time
    Fulfil the mother, handing Beauty on.
    You shall by breeding make Life answer yet,
    In Time’s despite, Time’s jeer that men go void;
    Your stamp of heaven shall be more largely set
    Than my one joy, ten thousand times enjoyed.

    The glories of our state and its achievement,
    Which wait their passing, shall not pass away.
    I will extend our term beyond bereavement,
    And launch our date into a dateless day.
      For you shall make recórd, and when that’s sealed
      In Beauty made immortal, all is healed.


XIII

    What are the names for Beauty? Who shall praise
    God’s pledge he can fulfil His creatures’ eyes?
    Or what strong words of what creative phrase
    Determine Beauty’s title in the skies?
    But I will call you Beauty Personate,
    Ambassadorial Beauty, and again
    Beauty triumphant, Beauty in the Gate,
    Beauty salvation of the souls of men.

    For Beauty was not Beauty till you came
    And now shall Beauty mean the sign you are;
    A Beacon burnt above the Dawn, a flame
    Like holy Lucifer the Morning Star,
      Who latest hangs in Heaven and is the gem
      On all the widowéd Night’s expectant Diadem.


XIV

    Love wooing Honour, Honour’s love did win
    And had his pleasure all a summer’s day.
    Not understanding how the dooms begin,
    Love wooing Honour, wooed her life away.
    Then wandered he a full five years unrest
    Until, one night, this Honour that had died
    Came as he slept, in youth grown glorified
    And smiling like the Saints whom God has blest.

    But when he saw her on the clear night shine
    Serene with more than mortal light upon her,
    The boy that careless was of things divine,
    Small Love, turned penitent to worship Honour.
      So Love can conquer Honour: when that’s past
      Dead Honour risen outdoes Love at last.


XV

    Your life is like a little winter’s day
    Whose sad sun rises late to set too soon;
    You have just come--why will you go away,
    Making an evening of what should be noon.
    Your life is like a little flute complaining
    A long way off, beyond the willow trees:
    A long way off, and nothing left remaining
    But memory of a music on the breeze.

    Your life is like a pitiful leave-taking
    Wept in a dream before a man’s awaking,
    A Call with only shadows to attend:
    A Benediction whispered and belated
    Which has no fruit beyond a consecrated,
    A consecrated silence at the end.


XVI

    Now shall the certain purpose of my soul
    By blind and empty things controlled be,
    And mine audacious course to that far goal
    Fall short, confessing mere mortality.
    Limbs shall have movement and ignore their living,
    Brain wit, that he his quickness may deny.
    My promised hope forswears in act of giving,
    Time eats me up and makes my words a lie.

    And mine unbounded dream has found a bar,
    And I must worst deceit of best things bear.
    Now dawn’s but daybreak, seas but waters are,
    Night darkness only, all wide heaven just air:
      And you to whom these fourteen lines I tell,
      My beauty, my desire: but not my love as well.


XVII

    Because my faltering feet may fail to dare
    The first descendant of the steps of Hell
    Give me the Word in time that triumphs there.
    I too must pass into the misty hollow
    Where all our living laughter stops: and hark!
    The tiny stuffless voices of the dark
    Have called me, called me, till I needs must follow:
    Give me the Word and I’ll attempt it well.

    Say it’s the little winking of an eye
    Which in that issue is uncurtained quite;
    A little sleep that helps a moment by
    Between the thin dawn and the large daylight.
      Ah! tell me more than yet was hoped of men;
      Swear that’s true now, and I’ll believe it then.


XVIII

    When you to Acheron’s ugly water come
    Where darkness is and formless mourners brood
    And down the shelves of that distasteful flood
    Survey the human rank in order dumb.
    When the pale dead go forward, tortured more
    By nothingness and longing than by fire,
    Which bear their hands in suppliance with desire,
    With stretched desire for the ulterior shore.

    Then go before them like a royal ghost
    And tread like Egypt or like Carthage crowned;
    Because in your Mortality the most
    Of all we may inherit has been found--
      Children for memory: the Faith for pride.
      Good land to leave: and young Love satisfied.


XIX

    We will not whisper, we have found the place
    Of silence and the endless halls of sleep.
    And that which breathes alone throughout the deep
    The end and the beginning: and the face
    Between the level brows of whose blind eyes
    Lie plenary contentment, full surcease
    Of violence, and the passionless long peace
    Wherein we lose our human lullabies.

    Look up and tell the immeasurable height
    Between the vault of the world and your dear head;
    That’s death, my little sister, and the night
    Which was our Mother beckons us to bed,
      Where large oblivion in her house is laid
      For us tired children, now our games are played.


XX

    I went to sleep at Dawn in Tuscany
    Beneath a Rock and dreamt a morning dream.
    I thought I stood by that baptismal stream
    Whereon the bounds of our redemption lie.
    And there, beyond, a radiance rose to take
    My soul at passing, in which light your eyes
    So filled me I was drunk with Paradise.
    Then the day broadened, but I did not wake.

    Here’s the last edge of my long parchment furled
    And all was writ that you might read it so.
    This sleep I swear shall last the length of day;
    Not noise, not chance, shall drive this dream away:
    Not time, not treachery, not good fortune--no,
    Not all the weight of all the wears of the world.


XXI

    Almighty God, whose justice like a sun
    Shall coruscate along the floors of Heaven,
    Raising what’s low, perfecting what’s undone,
    Breaking the proud and making odd things even.
    The poor of Jesus Christ along the street
    In your rain sodden, in your snows unshod,
    They have nor hearth, nor sword, nor human meat,
    Nor even the bread of men: Almighty God.

    The poor of Jesus Christ whom no man hears
    Have waited on your vengeance much too long.
    Wipe out not tears but blood: our eyes bleed tears.
    Come smite our damnéd sophistries so strong
    That thy rude hammer battering this rude wrong
    Ring down the abyss of twice ten thousand years.


XXII

    Mother of all my cities once there lay
      About your weedy wharves an orient shower
      Of spice and languorous silk and all the dower
    That Ocean gave you on his bridal day.
    And now the youth and age have passed away
      And all the sail superb and all the power;
      Your time’s a time of memory like that hour
    Just after sunset, wonderful and grey.

    Too tired to rise and much too sad to weep,
      With strong arm nerveless on a nerveless knee,
    Still to your slumbering ears the spousal deep
      Murmurs his thoughts of eld eternally;
    But your soul wakes not from its holy sleep
    Dreaming of dead delights beside a tideless sea.


XXIII

    November is that historied Emperor
      Conquered in age but foot to foot with fate
    Who from his refuge high has heard the roar
      Of squadrons in pursuit, and now, too late,
    Stirrups the storm and calls the winds to war,
      And arms the garrison of his last heirloom,
    And shakes the sky to its extremest shore
      With battle against irrevocable doom.

    Till, driven and hurled from his strong citadels,
      He flies in hurrying cloud and spurs him on,
    Empty of lingerings, empty of farewells
      And final benedictions and is gone.
    But in my garden all the trees have shed
    Their legacies of the light and all the flowers are dead.


XXIV

    Hoar Time about the House betakes him slow
    Seeking an entry for his weariness.
    And in that dreadful company distress
    And the sad night with silent footsteps go.
    On my poor fire the brands are scarce aglow
    And in the woods without what memories press
    Where, waning in the trees from less to less
    Mysterious hangs the hornéd moon and low.

    For now December, full of agéd care
    Comes in upon the year and weakly grieves;
    Mumbling his lost desires and his despair
    And with mad trembling hand still interweaves
    The dank sear flower-stalks tangled in his hair,
    While round about him whirl the rotten leaves.


XXV

    It freezes: all across a soundless sky
    The birds go home. The governing dark’s begun.
    The steadfast dark that waits not for a sun;
    The ultimate dark wherein the race shall die.
    Death with his evil finger to his lip
    Leers in at human windows, turning spy
    To learn the country where his rule shall lie
    When he assumes perpetual generalship.

    The undefeated enemy, the chill
    That shall benumb the voiceful earth at last,
    Is master of our moment, and has bound
    The viewless wind itself. There is no sound.
    It freezes. Every friendly stream is fast.
    It freezes, and the graven twigs are still.


XXVI

    O my companion, O my sister Sleep,
    The valley is all before us, bear me on.
    High through the heaven of evening, hardly gone,
    Beyond the harbour lights, beyond the steep,
    Beyond the land and its lost benison
    To where, majestic on the darkening deep,
    The night comes forward from Mount Aurion.
    O my companion, O my sister Sleep.

    Above the surf-line, into the night-breeze;
    Eastward above the ever-whispering seas;
    Through the warm airs with no more watch to keep.
    My day’s run out and all its dooms are graven.
    O dear forerunner of Death and promise of Haven.
    O my companion, O my sister Sleep.


XXVII

    Are you the end, Despair, or the poor least
      Of them that cast great shadows and are lies?
      That dread the simple and destroy the wise,
    Fail at the tomb and triumph at the feast?
    You were not found on Olivet, dull beast,
      Nor in Thebaid, when the night’s agonies
      Dissolved to glory on the effulgent east
    And Jesus Christ was in the morning skies.

    You did not curb the indomitable crest
      Of Tzerna-Gora, when the Falcon-bred
        Screamed over the Adriatic, and their Lord
    Went riding out, much angrier than the rest,
      To summon at ban the living and the dead
        And break the Mahommedan with the repeated sword.


XXVIII

    But oh! not Lovely Helen, nor the pride
    Of that most ancient Ilium matched with doom.
    Men murdered Priam in his royal room
    And Troy was burned with fire and Hector died.
    For even Hector’s dreadful day was more
    Than all his breathing courage dared defend
    The armouréd light and bulwark of the war
    Trailed his great story to the accustomed end.

    He was the city’s buttress, Priam’s Son,
    The Soldier born in bivouac praises great
    And horns in double front of battle won.
    Yet down he went: when unremembering fate
    Felled him at last with all his armour on.
    Hector: the horseman: in the Scæan Gate.


XXIX

    The world’s a stage. The light is in one’s eyes.
    The Auditorium is extremely dark.
    The more dishonest get the larger rise;
    The more offensive make the greater mark.
    The women on it prosper by their shape,
    Some few by their vivacity. The men,
    By tailoring in breeches and in cape.
    The world’s a stage--I say it once again.

    The scenery is very much the best
    Of what the wretched drama has to show,
    Also the prompter happens to be dumb.
    We drink behind the scenes and pass a jest
    On all our folly; then, before we go
    Loud cries for “Author” ... but he doesn’t come.


XXX

    The world’s a stage--and I’m the Super man,
    And no one seems responsible for salary.
    I roar my part as loudly as I can
    And all I mouth I mouth it to the gallery.
    I haven’t got another rhyme in “alery”
    It would have made a better job, no doubt
    If I had left attempt at Rhyming out,
    Like Alfred Tennyson adapting Malory.

    The world’s a stage, the company of which
    Has very little talent and less reading:
    But many a waddling heathen painted bitch
    And many a standing cad of gutter breeding.
      We sweat to learn our book: for all our pains
      We pass. The Chucker-out alone remains.


XXXI

    The world’s a stage. The trifling entrance fee
    Is paid (by proxy) to the registrar.
    The Orchestra is very loud and free
    But plays no music in particular.
    They do not print a programme, that I know.
    The caste is large. There isn’t any plot.
    The acting of the piece is far below
    The very worst of modernistic rot.

    The only part about it I enjoy
    Is what was called in English the Foyay.
    There will I stand apart awhile and toy
    With thought, and set my cigarette alight;
    And then--without returning to the play--
    On with my coat and out into the night.




II

LYRICAL, DIDACTIC AND GROTESQUE




TO DIVES


    Dives, when you and I go down to Hell,
    Where scribblers end and millionaires as well,
    We shall be carrying on our separate backs
    Two very large but very different packs;
    And as you stagger under yours, my friend,
    Down the dull shore where all our journeys end,
    And go before me (as your rank demands)
    Towards the infinite flat underlands,
    And that dear river of forgetfulness--
    Charon, a man of exquisite address
    (For, as your wife’s progenitors could tell,
    They’re very strict on etiquette in Hell),
    Will, since you are a lord, observe, “My lord,
    We cannot take these weighty things aboard!”
    Then down they go, my wretched Dives, down--
    The fifteen sorts of boots you kept for town,
    The hat to meet the Devil in; the plain
    But costly ties; the cases of champagne;
    The solid watch, and seal, and chain, and charm;
    The working model of a Burning Farm
    (To give the little Belials); all the three
    Biscuits for Cerberus; the guarantee
    From Lambeth that the Rich can never burn,
    And even promising a safe return;
    The admirable overcoat, designed
    To cross Cocytus--very warmly lined:
    Sweet Dives, you will leave them all behind
    And enter Hell as tattered and as bare
    As was your father when he took the air
    Behind a barrow-load in Leicester Square.
    Then turned to me, and noting one that brings
    With careless step a mist of shadowy things:
    Laughter and memories, and a few regrets,
    Some honour, and a quantity of debts,
    A doubt or two of sorts, a trust in God,
    And (what will seem to you extremely odd)
    His father’s granfer’s father’s father’s name,
    Unspoilt, untitled, even spelt the same;
    Charon, who twenty thousand times before
    Has ferried Poets to the ulterior shore,
    Will estimate the weight I bear, and cry--
    “Comrade!” (He has himself been known to try
    His hand at Latin and Italian verse,
    Much in the style of Virgil--only worse)
    “We let such vain imaginaries pass!”
    Then tell me, Dives, which will look the ass--
    You, or myself? Or Charon? Who can tell?
    They order things so damnably in Hell.




STANZAS WRITTEN ON BATTERSEA BRIDGE DURING A SOUTH-WESTERLY GALE


    The woods and downs have caught the mid-December,
      The noisy woods and high sea-downs of home;
    The wind has found me and I do remember
      The strong scent of the foam.

    Woods, darlings of my wandering feet, another
      Possesses you, another treads the Down;
    The South West Wind that was my elder brother
      Has come to me in town.

    The wind is shouting from the hills of morning,
      I do remember and I will not stay.
    I’ll take the Hampton road without a warning
      And get me clean away.

    The Channel is up, the little seas are leaping,
      The tide is making over Arun Bar;
    And there’s my boat, where all the rest are sleeping
      And my companions are.

    I’ll board her, and apparel her, and I’ll mount her,
      My boat, that was the strongest friend to me--
    That brought my boyhood to its first encounter
      And taught me the wide sea.

    Now shall I drive her, roaring hard a’ weather,
      Right for the salt and leave them all behind;
    We’ll quite forget the treacherous streets together
      And find--or shall we find?

    There is no Pilotry my soul relies on
      Whereby to catch beneath my bended hand,
    Faint and beloved along the extreme horizon
      That unforgotten land.

    We shall not round the granite piers and paven
      To lie to wharves we know with canvas furled.
    My little Boat, we shall not make the haven--
      It is not of the world.

    Somewhere of English forelands grandly guarded
      It stands, but not for exiles, marked and clean;
    Oh! not for us. A mist has risen and marred it:--
      My youth lies in between.

    So in this snare that holds me and appals me,
      Where honour hardly lives nor loves remain,
    The Sea compels me and my County calls me,
      But stronger things restrain.

       *       *       *       *       *

    England, to me that never have malingered,
      Nor spoken falsely, nor your flattery used,
    Nor even in my rightful garden lingered:--
      What have you not refused?




THE SOUTH COUNTRY


    When I am living in the Midlands
      That are sodden and unkind,
    I light my lamp in the evening:
      My work is left behind;
    And the great hills of the South Country
      Come back into my mind.

    The great hills of the South Country
      They stand along the sea;
    And it’s there walking in the high woods
      That I could wish to be,
    And the men that were boys when I was a boy
      Walking along with me.

    The men that live in North England
      I saw them for a day:
    Their hearts are set upon the waste fells,
      Their skies are fast and grey;
    From their castle-walls a man may see
      The mountains far away.

    The men that live in West England
      They see the Severn strong,
    A-rolling on rough water brown
      Light aspen leaves along.
    They have the secret of the Rocks,
      And the oldest kind of song.

    But the men that live in the South Country
      Are the kindest and most wise,
    They get their laughter from the loud surf,
      And the faith in their happy eyes
    Comes surely from our Sister the Spring
      When over the sea she flies;
    The violets suddenly bloom at her feet,
      She blesses us with surprise.

    I never get between the pines
      But I smell the Sussex air;
    Nor I never come on a belt of sand
      But my home is there.
    And along the sky the line of the Downs
      So noble and so bare.

    A lost thing could I never find,
      Nor a broken thing mend:
    And I fear I shall be all alone
      When I get towards the end.
    Who will there be to comfort me
      Or who will be my friend?

    I will gather and carefully make my friends
      Of the men of the Sussex Weald,
    They watch the stars from silent folds,
      They stiffly plough the field.
    By them and the God of the South Country
      My poor soul shall be healed.

    If I ever become a rich man,
      Or if ever I grow to be old,
    I will build a house with deep thatch
      To shelter me from the cold,
    And there shall the Sussex songs be sung
      And the story of Sussex told.

    I will hold my house in the high wood
      Within a walk of the sea,
    And the men that were boys when I was a boy
      Shall sit and drink with me.




THE FANATIC


    Last night in Compton Street, Soho,
    A man whom many of you know
    Gave up the ghost at half past nine.
    That evening he had been to dine
    At Gressington’s--an act unwise,
    But not the cause of his demise.
    The doctors all agree that he
    Was touched with cardiac atrophy
    Accelerated (more or less)
    By lack of proper food, distress,
    Uncleanliness, and loss of sleep.
      He was a man that could not keep
    His money (when he had the same)
    Because of creditors who came
    And took it from him; and he gave
    So freely that he could not save.
      But all the while a sort of whim
    Persistently remained with him,
    Half admirable, half absurd:
    To keep his word, to keep his word....
    By which he did not mean what you
    And I would mean (of payments due
    Or punctual rental of the Flat--
    He was a deal too mad for that)
    But--as he put it with a fine
    Abandon, foolish or divine--
    But “That great word which every man
    Gave God before his life began.”
    It was a sacred word, he said,
    Which comforted the pathless dead
    And made God smile when it was shown
    Unforfeited, before the Throne.
    And this (he said) he meant to hold
    In spite of debt, and hate, and cold;
    And this (he said) he meant to show
    As passport to the Wards below.
    He boasted of it and gave praise
    To his own self through all his days.
      He wrote a record to preserve
    How steadfastly he did not swerve
    From keeping it; how stiff he stood
    Its guardian, and maintained it good.
    He had two witnesses to swear
    He kept it once in Berkeley Square.
    (Where hardly anything survives)
    And, through the loneliest of lives
    He kept it clean, he kept it still,
    Down to the last extremes of ill.
      So when he died, of many friends
    Who came in crowds from all the ends
    Of London, that it might be known
    They knew the man who died alone,
    Some, who had thought his mood sublime
    And sent him soup from time to time,
    Said, “Well, you cannot make them fit
    The world, and there’s an end of it!”
    But others, wondering at him, said:
    “The man that kept his word is dead!”
      Then angrily, a certain third
    Cried, “Gentlemen, he kept his word.
    And as a man whom beasts surround
    Tumultuous, on a little mound
    Stands Archer, for one dreadful hour,
    Because a Man is born to Power--
    And still, to daunt the pack below,
    Twangs the clear purpose of his bow,
    Till overwhelmed he dares to fall:
    So stood this bulwark of us all.
    He kept his word as none but he
    Could keep it, and as did not we.
    And round him as he kept his word
    To-day’s diseased and faithless herd,
    A moment loud, a moment strong,
    But foul forever, rolled along.”




THE EARLY MORNING


    The moon on the one hand, the dawn on the other:
    The moon is my sister, the dawn is my brother.
    The moon on my left and the dawn on my right.
    My brother, good morning: my sister, good night.




OUR LORD AND OUR LADY


    They warned Our Lady for the Child
      That was Our blessed Lord,
    And She took Him into the desert wild,
      Over the camel’s ford.

    And a long song She sang to Him
      And a short story told:
    And She wrapped Him in a woollen cloak
      To keep Him from the cold.

    But when Our Lord was grown a man
      The Rich they dragged Him down,
    And they crucified Him in Golgotha,
      Out and beyond the Town.

    They crucified Him on Calvary,
      Upon an April day;
    And because He had been her little Son
      She followed Him all the way.

    Our Lady stood beside the Cross,
      A little space apart,
    And when She heard Our Lord cry out
      A sword went through Her Heart.

    They laid Our Lord in a marble tomb,
      Dead, in a winding sheet.
    But Our Lady stands above the world
      With the white Moon at Her feet.




COURTESY


    Of Courtesy, it is much less
    Than Courage of Heart or Holiness,
    Yet in my Walks it seems to me
    That the Grace of God is in Courtesy.

    On Monks I did in Storrington fall,
    They took me straight into their Hall;
    I saw Three Pictures on a wall,
    And Courtesy was in them all.

    The first the Annunciation;
    The second the Visitation;
    The third the Consolation,
    Of God that was Our Lady’s Son.

    The first was of Saint Gabriel;
    On Wings a-flame from Heaven he fell;
    And as he went upon one knee
    He shone with Heavenly Courtesy.

    Our Lady out of Nazareth rode--
    It was Her month of heavy load;
    Yet was Her face both great and kind,
    For Courtesy was in Her Mind.

    The third it was our Little Lord,
    Whom all the Kings in arms adored;
    He was so small you could not see
    His large intent of Courtesy.

    Our Lord, that was Our Lady’s Son,
    Go bless you, People, one by one;
    My Rhyme is written, my work is done.




THE NIGHT


    Most holy Night, that still dost keep
    The keys of all the doors of sleep,
    To me when my tired eyelids close
        Give thou repose.

    And let the far lament of them
    That chaunt the dead day’s requiem
    Make in my ears, who wakeful lie,
        Soft lullaby.

    Let them that guard the horned moon
    By my bedside their memories croon.
    So shall I have new dreams and blest
        In my brief rest.

    Fold your great wings about my face,
    Hide dawning from my resting-place,
    And cheat me with your false delight,
        Most Holy Night.




THE LEADER


    The sword fell down: I heard a knell;
      I thought that ease was best,
    And sullen men that buy and sell
      Were host: and I was guest.
    All unashamed I sat with swine,
      We shook the dice for war,
    The night was drunk with an evil wine--
      But she went on before.

        _She rode a steed of the sea-foam breed,_
          _All faery was her blade,_
        _And the armour on her tender limbs_
          _Was of the moonshine made._

    By God that sends the master-maids,
      I know not whence she came,
    But the sword she bore to save the soul
      Went up like an altar flame
    Where a broken race in a desert place
      Call on the Holy Name.

        _We strained our eyes in the dim day-rise,_
          _We could not see them plain;_
        _But two dead men from Valmy fen_
          _Rode at her bridle-rein._

    I hear them all, my fathers call,
      I see them how they ride,
    And where had been that rout obscene
      Was an army straight with pride.
    A hundred thousand marching men,
      Of squadrons twenty score,
    And after them all the guns, the guns,
      But she went on before.

        _Her face was like a king’s command_
          _When all the swords are drawn._
        _She stretched her arms and smiled at us,_
        _Her head was higher than the hills._
        _She led us to the endless plains._
          _We lost her in the dawn._




A BIVOUAC


        I

    You came without a human sound,
      You came and brought my soul to me;
    I only woke, and all around
    They slumbered on the firelit ground,
      Beside the guns in Burgundy.


II

    I felt the gesture of your hands,
      You signed my forehead with the Cross;
    The gesture of your holy hands
    Was bounteous--like the misty lands
      Along the Hills in Calvados.


III

    But when I slept I saw your eyes,
      Hungry as death, and very far.
    I saw demand in your dim eyes
    Mysterious as the moons that rise
      At midnight, in the Pines of Var.




TO THE BALLIOL MEN STILL IN AFRICA


    Years ago when I was at Balliol,
      Balliol men--and I was one--
    Swam together in winter rivers,
      Wrestled together under the sun.
    And still in the heart of us, Balliol, Balliol,
      Loved already, but hardly known,
    Welded us each of us into the others:
      Called a levy and chose her own.

    Here is a House that armours a man
      With the eyes of a boy and the heart of a ranger,
    And a laughing way in the teeth of the world
      And a holy hunger and thirst for danger:
    Balliol made me, Balliol fed me,
      Whatever I had she gave me again:
    And the best of Balliol loved and led me.
      God be with you, Balliol men.

    I have said it before, and I say it again,
      There was treason done, and a false word spoken,
    And England under the dregs of men,
      And bribes about, and a treaty broken:
    But angry, lonely, hating it still,
      I wished to be there in spite of the wrong.
    My heart was heavy for Cumnor Hill
      And the hammer of galloping all day long.

    Galloping outward into the weather,
      Hands a-ready and battle in all:
    Words together and wine together
      And song together in Balliol Hall.
    Rare and single! Noble and few!...
      Oh! they have wasted you over the sea!
    The only brothers ever I knew,
      The men that laughed and quarrelled with me.

      *       *       *       *       *

    Balliol made me, Balliol fed me,
      Whatever I had she gave me again;
    And the best of Balliol loved and led me,
      God be with you, Balliol men.




     VERSES TO A LORD WHO, IN THE HOUSE OF LORDS, SAID THAT THOSE WHO
     OPPOSED THE SOUTH AFRICAN ADVENTURE CONFUSED SOLDIERS WITH
     MONEY-GRUBBERS


    You thought because we held, my lord,
      An ancient cause and strong,
    That therefore we maligned the sword:
      My lord, you did us wrong.

    We also know the sacred height
      Up on Tugela side,
    Where those three hundred fought with Beit
      And fair young Wernher died.

    The daybreak on the failing force,
      The final sabres drawn:
    Tall Goltman, silent on his horse,
      Superb against the dawn.

    The little mound where Eckstein stood
      And gallant Albu fell,
    And Oppenheim, half blind with blood
    Went fording through the rising flood--
      My Lord, we know them well.

    The little empty homes forlorn,
    The ruined synagogues that mourn,
      In Frankfort and Berlin;
    We knew them when the peace was torn--
    We of a nobler lineage born--
    And now by all the gods of scorn
      We mean to rub them in.




THE REBEL


    There is a wall of which the stones
    Are lies and bribes and dead men’s bones.
    And wrongfully this evil wall
    Denies what all men made for all,
    And shamelessly this wall surrounds
    Our homesteads and our native grounds.

    But I will gather and I will ride,
    And I will summon a countryside,
    And many a man shall hear my halloa
    Who never had thought the horn to follow;
    And many a man shall ride with me
    Who never had thought on earth to see
    High Justice in her armoury.

    When we find them where they stand,
    A mile of men on either hand,
    I mean to charge from right away
    And force the flanks of their array,
    And press them inward from the plains,
    And drive them clamouring down the lanes,
    And gallop and harry and have them down,
    And carry the gates and hold the town.
    Then shall I rest me from my ride
    With my great anger satisfied.

    Only, before I eat and drink,
    When I have killed them all, I think
    That I will batter their carven names,
    And slit the pictures in their frames,
    And burn for scent their cedar door,
    And melt the gold their women wore,
    And hack their horses at the knees,
    And hew to death their timber trees,
    And plough their gardens deep and through--
    And all these things I mean to do
    For fear perhaps my little son
    Should break his hands, as I have done.




THE PROPHET LOST IN THE HILLS AT EVENING


    Strong God which made the topmost stars
      To circulate and keep their course,
    Remember me; whom all the bars
      Of sense and dreadful fate enforce.

    Above me in your heights and tall,
      Impassable the summits freeze,
    Below the haunted waters call
      Impassable beyond the trees.

    I hunger and I have no bread.
      My gourd is empty of the wine.
    Surely the footsteps of the dead
      Are shuffling softly close to mine!

    It darkens. I have lost the ford.
      There is a change on all things made.
    The rocks have evil faces, Lord,
      And I am awfully afraid.

    Remember me: the Voids of Hell
      Expand enormous all around.
    Strong friend of souls, Emmanuel,
      Redeem me from accursed ground.

    The long descent of wasted days,
      To these at last have led me down;
    Remember that I filled with praise
    The meaningless and doubtful ways
      That lead to an eternal town.

    I challenged and I kept the Faith,
      The bleeding path alone I trod;
    It darkens. Stand about my wraith,
      And harbour me--almighty God.




THE END OF THE ROAD


    IN THESE BOOTS AND WITH THIS STAFF
    Two hundred leaguers and a half
    Walked I, went I, paced I, tripped I,
    Marched I, held I, skelped I, slipped I,
    Pushed I, panted, swung and dashed I;
    Picked I, forded, swam and splashed I,
    Strolled I, climbed I, crawled and scrambled,
    Dropped and dipped I, ranged and rambled;
    Plodded I, hobbled I, trudged and tramped I,
    And in lonely spinnies camped I,
    And in haunted pinewoods slept I,
    Lingered, loitered, limped and crept I,
    Clambered, halted, stepped and leapt I;
    Slowly sauntered, roundly strode I,
    And ... (Oh! Patron saints and Angels
                 That protect the four Evangels!
                 And you Prophets vel majores
                 Vel incerti, vel minores,
                 Virgines ac confessores
                 Chief of whose peculiar glories
                 Est in Aula Regis stare
                 Atque orare et exorare
                 Et clamare et conclamare
                 Clamantes cum clamoribus
                 Pro Nobis Peccatoribus.)
    Let me not conceal it.... _Rode I._
    (For who but critics could complain
    Of “riding” in a railway train?)
    Across the valley and the high-land,
    With all the world on either hand
    Drinking when I had a mind to,
    Singing when I felt inclined to;
    Nor ever turned my face to home
    Till I had slaked my heart at Rome.




AN ORACLE

THAT WARNED THE WRITER WHEN ON PILGRIMAGE


    Matutinus adest ubi Vesper, et accipiens te
    Saepe recusatum voces intelligit hospes
    Rusticus ignotas notas, ac flumina tellus
    Occupat--In sancto tum, tum, stans Aede caveto
    Tonsuram Hirsuti Capitis, via namque pedestrem
    Ferrea praeveniens cursum, peregrine, laborem
    Pro pietate tua inceptum frustratur, amore
    Antiqui Ritus alto sub Numine Romae.

_Translation of the above_:--

    When early morning seems but eve
    And they that still refuse receive:
    When speech unknown men understand;
    And floods are crossed upon dry land.
    Within the Sacred Walls beware
    The Shaven Head that boasts of Hair,
    For when the road attains the rail
    The Pilgrim’s great attempt shall fail.




THE DEATH AND LAST CONFESSION OF WANDERING PETER


    When Peter Wanderwide was young
      He wandered everywhere he would:
    And all that he approved was sung,
      And most of what he saw was good.

    When Peter Wanderwide was thrown
      By Death himself beyond Auxerre,
    He chanted in heroic tone
      To priests and people gathered there:

    “If all that I have loved and seen
      Be with me on the Judgment Day,
    I shall be saved the crowd between
      From Satan and his foul array.

    “Almighty God will surely cry,
      ‘St Michael! Who is this that stands
    With Ireland in his dubious eye,
      And Perigord between his hands,

    “‘And on his arm the stirrup-thongs,
      And in his gait the narrow seas,
    And in his mouth Burgundian songs,
      But in his heart the Pyrenees?’

    “St Michael then will answer right
      (And not without angelic shame),
    ‘I seem to know his face by sight:
      I cannot recollect his name ...?’

    “St Peter will befriend me then,
      Because my name is Peter too:
    ‘I know him for the best of men
      That ever wallopped barley brew.

    “‘And though I did not know him well
      And though his soul were clogged with sin,
    _I_ hold the keys of Heaven and Hell.
      Be welcome, noble Peterkin.’

    “Then shall I spread my native wings
      And tread secure the heavenly floor,
    And tell the Blessed doubtful things
      Of Val d’Aran and Perigord.”

      *       *       *       *       *

    This was the last and solemn jest
      Of weary Peter Wanderwide.
    He spoke it with a failing zest,
      And having spoken it, he died.




DEDICATORY ODE


    I mean to write with all my strength
      (It lately has been sadly waning),
    A ballad of enormous length--
      Some parts of which will need explaining.[A]

    Because (unlike the bulk of men
      Who write for fame or public ends),
    I turn a lax and fluent pen
      To talking of my private friends.[B]

    For no one, in our long decline,
      So dusty, spiteful and divided,
    Had quite such pleasant friends as mine,
      Or loved them half as much as I did.

      *       *       *       *       *

    The Freshman ambles down the High,
      In love with everything he sees,
    He notes the racing autumn sky.
      He sniffs a lively autumn breeze.

    “Can this be Oxford? This the place?”
      (He cries) “of which my father said
    The tutoring was a damned disgrace,
      The creed a mummery, stuffed and dead?

    “Can it be here that Uncle Paul
      Was driven by excessive gloom,
    To drink and debt, and, last of all,
      To smoking opium in his room?

    “Is it from here the people come,
      Who talk so loud, and roll their eyes,
    And stammer? How extremely rum!
      How curious! What a great surprise.

    “Some influence of a nobler day
      Than theirs (I mean than Uncle Paul’s),
    Has roused the sleep of their decay,
      And flecked with life their crumbling walls.

    “O! dear undaunted boys of old,
      Would that your names were carven here,
    For all the world in stamps of gold,
      That I might read them and revere.

    “Who wrought and handed down for me
      This Oxford of the larger air,
    Laughing, and full of faith, and free,
      With youth resplendent everywhere?”

    Then learn: thou ill-instructed, blind,
      Young, callow, and untutored man,
    Their private names were....[C]
      Their club was called REPUBLICAN.

      *       *       *       *       *

    Where on their banks of light they lie,
      The happy hills of Heaven between,
    The Gods that rule the morning sky
      Are not more young, nor more serene

    Than were the intrepid Four that stand,
      The first who dared to live their dream.
    And on this uncongenial land
      To found the Abbey of Theleme.

    We kept the Rabelaisian plan:[D]
      We dignified the dainty cloisters
    With Natural Law, the Rights of Man,
      Song, Stoicism, Wine and Oysters.

    The library was most inviting:
      The books upon the crowded shelves
    Were mainly of our private writing:
      We kept a school and taught ourselves.

    We taught the art of writing things
      On men we still should like to throttle:
    And where to get the Blood of Kings
      At only half a crown a bottle.

      *       *       *       *       *

    Eheu Fugaces! Postume!
      (An old quotation out of mode);
    My coat of dreams is stolen away
      My youth is passing down the road.

      *       *       *       *       *

    The wealth of youth, we spent it well
      And decently, as very few can.
    And is it lost? I cannot tell:
      And what is more, I doubt if you can.

    The question’s very much too wide,
      And much too deep, and much too hollow,
    And learned men on either side
      Use arguments I cannot follow.

    They say that in the unchanging place,
      Where all we loved is always dear,
    We meet our morning face to face
      And find at last our twentieth year....

    They say (and I am glad they say)
      It is so; and it may be so:
    It may be just the other way,
      I cannot tell. But this I know:

    From quiet homes and first beginning,
      Out to the undiscovered ends,
    There’s nothing worth the wear of winning,
      But laughter and the love of friends.

      *       *       *       *       *

    But something dwindles, oh! my peers,
      And something cheats the heart and passes,
    And Tom that meant to shake the years
      Has come to merely rattling glasses.

    And He, the Father of the Flock,
      Is keeping Burmesans in order,
    An exile on a lonely rock
      That overlooks the Chinese border.

    And One (Myself I mean--no less),
      Ah!--will Posterity believe it--
    Not only don’t deserve success,
      But hasn’t managed to achieve it.

    Not even this peculiar town
      Has ever fixed a friendship firmer,
    But--one is married, one’s gone down,
      And one’s a Don, and one’s in Burmah.

      *       *       *       *       *

    And oh! the days, the days, the days,
      When all the four were off together:
    The infinite deep of summer haze,
      The roaring boast of autumn weather!

      *       *       *       *       *

    I will not try the reach again,
      I will not set my sail alone,
    To moor a boat bereft of men
      At Yarnton’s tiny docks of stone.

    But I will sit beside the fire,
      And put my hand before my eyes,
    And trace, to fill my heart’s desire,
      The last of all our Odysseys.

    The quiet evening kept her tryst:
      Beneath an open sky we rode,
    And passed into a wandering mist
      Along the perfect Evenlode.

    The tender Evenlode that makes
      Her meadows hush to hear the sound
    Of waters mingling in the brakes,
      And binds my heart to English ground.

    A lovely river, all alone,
      She lingers in the hills and holds
    A hundred little towns of stone,
      Forgotten in the western wolds.

      *       *       *       *       *

    I dare to think (though meaner powers
      Possess our thrones, and lesser wits
    Are drinking worser wine than ours,
      In what’s no longer Austerlitz)

    That surely a tremendous ghost,
      The brazen-lunged, the bumper-filler,
    Still sings to an immortal toast,
      The Misadventures of the Miller.

    The unending seas are hardly bar
      To men with such a prepossession:
    We were? Why then, by God, we _are_--
      Order! I call the Club to session!

    You do retain the song we set,
      And how it rises, trips and scans?
    You keep the sacred memory yet,
      Republicans? Republicans?

    You know the way the words were hurled,
      To break the worst of fortune’s rub?
    I give the toast across the world,
      And drink it, “Gentlemen: the Club.”




DEDICATION ON THE GIFT OF A BOOK TO A CHILD


    Child! do not throw this book about!
      Refrain from the unholy pleasure
    Of cutting all the pictures out!
      Preserve it as your chiefest treasure.

    Child, have you never heard it said
      That you are heir to all the ages?
    Why, then, your hands were never made
      To tear these beautiful thick pages!

    Your little hands were made to take
      The better things and leave the worse ones:
    They also may be used to shake
      The Massive Paws of Elder Persons.

    And when your prayers complete the day,
      Darling, your little tiny hands
    Were also made, I think, to pray
      For men that lose their fairylands.




DEDICATION OF A CHILD’S BOOK OF IMAGINARY TALES

WHEREIN WRONG-DOERS SUFFER


    And is it true? It is not true!
    And if it was it wouldn’t do
    For people such as me and you,
    Who very nearly all day long
    Are doing something rather wrong.




HOMAGE


        I

    There is a light around your head
    Which only Saints of God may wear,
    And all the flowers on which you tread
    In pleasaunce more than ours have fed,
    And supped the essential air
    Whose summer is a-pulse with music everywhere.


II

    For you are younger than the mornings are
    That in the mountains break;
    When upland shepherds see their only star
    Pale on the dawn, and make
    In his surcease the hours,
    The early hours of all their happy circuit take.




THE MOON’S FUNERAL


        I

    The Moon is dead. I saw her die.
    She in a drifting cloud was drest,
    She lay along the uncertain west,
    A dream to see.
    And very low she spake to me:
    “I go where none may understand,
    I fade into the nameless land,
    And there must lie perpetually.”
    And therefore I,
    And therefore loudly, loudly I
    And high
    And very piteously make cry:
    “The Moon is dead. I saw her die.”


II

    And will she never rise again?
    The Holy Moon? Oh, never more!
    Perhaps along the inhuman shore
    Where pale ghosts are
    Beyond the low lethean fen
    She and some wide infernal star....
    To us who loved her never more,
    The Moon will never rise again.
    Oh! never more in nightly sky
    Her eye so high shall peep and pry
    To see the great world rolling by.
    For why?
    The Moon is dead. I saw her die.




THE HAPPY JOURNALIST


    I love to walk about at night
      By nasty lanes and corners foul,
    All shielded from the unfriendly light
      And independent as the owl.

    By dirty grates I love to lurk;
      I often stoop to take a squint
    At printers working at their work.
      I muse upon the rot they print.

    The beggars please me, and the mud:
      The editors beneath their lamps
    As--Mr Howl demanding blood,
      And Lord Retender stealing stamps,

    And Mr Bing instructing liars,
      His elder son composing trash;
    Beaufort (whose real name is Meyers)
      Refusing anything but cash.

    I like to think of Mr Meyers,
      I like to think of Mr Bing.
    I like to think about the liars:
      It pleases me, that sort of thing.

    Policemen speak to me, but I,
      Remembering my civic rights,
    Neglect them and do not reply.
      I love to walk about at nights!

    At twenty-five to four I bunch
      Across a cab I can’t afford.
    I ring for breakfast after lunch.
      I am as happy as a lord!




LINES TO A DON


    Remote and ineffectual Don
    That dared attack my Chesterton,
    With that poor weapon, half-impelled,
    Unlearnt, unsteady, hardly held,
    Unworthy for a tilt with men--
    Your quavering and corroded pen;
    Don poor at Bed and worse at Table,
    Don pinched, Don starved, Don miserable;
    Don stuttering, Don with roving eyes,
    Don nervous, Don of crudities;
    Don clerical, Don ordinary,
    Don self-absorbed and solitary;
    Don here-and-there, Don epileptic;
    Don puffed and empty, Don dyspeptic;
    Don middle-class, Don sycophantic,
    Don dull, Don brutish, Don pedantic;
    Don hypocritical, Don bad,
    Don furtive, Don three-quarters mad;
    Don (since a man must make an end),
    Don that shall never be my friend.

      *       *       *       *       *

    Don different from those regal Dons!
    With hearts of gold and lungs of bronze,
    Who shout and bang and roar and bawl
    The Absolute across the hall,
    Or sail in amply bellowing gown
    Enormous through the Sacred Town,
    Bearing from College to their homes
    Deep cargoes of gigantic tomes;
    Dons admirable! Dons of Might!
    Uprising on my inward sight
    Compact of ancient tales, and port
    And sleep--and learning of a sort.
    Dons English, worthy of the land;
    Dons rooted; Dons that understand.
    Good Dons perpetual that remain
    A landmark, walling in the plain--
    The horizon of my memories--
    Like large and comfortable trees.

      *       *       *       *       *

    Don very much apart from these,
    Thou scapegoat Don, thou Don devoted,
    Don to thine own damnation quoted,
    Perplexed to find thy trivial name
    Reared in my verse to lasting shame.
    Don dreadful, rasping Don and wearing,
    Repulsive Don--Don past all bearing.
    Don of the cold and doubtful breath,
    Don despicable, Don of death;
    Don nasty, skimpy, silent, level;
    Don evil; Don that serves the devil.
    Don ugly--that makes fifty lines.
    There is a Canon which confines
    A Rhymed Octosyllabic Curse
    If written in Iambic Verse
    To fifty lines. I never cut;
    I far prefer to end it--but
    Believe me I shall soon return.
    My fires are banked, but still they burn
    To write some more about the Don
    That dared attack my Chesterton.




NEWDIGATE POEM

     A PRIZE POEM SUBMITTED BY MR LAMBKIN, THEN SCHOLAR AND LATER FELLOW
     OF BURFORD COLLEGE, TO THE EXAMINERS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD ON
     THE PRESCRIBED POETIC THEME SET BY THEM IN 1893, “THE BENEFITS OF
     THE ELECTRIC LIGHT”


        Hail, Happy Muse, and touch the tuneful string!
    The benefits conferred by Science[E] I sing.
        Under the kind Examiners’ direction[F]
    I only write about them in connection
    With benefits which the Electric Light
    Confers on us; especially at night.
    These are my theme, of these my song shall rise.
    My lofty head shall swell to strike the skies.[G]
    And tears of hopeless love bedew the maiden’s eyes.
        Descend, O Muse, from thy divine abode,
        To Osney, on the Seven Bridges Road;
    For under Osney’s solitary shade
    The bulk of the Electric Light is made.
    Here are the works;--from hence the current flows
    Which (so the Company’s prospectus goes)
        Can furnish to Subscribers hour by hour
    No less than sixteen thousand candle power,[H]
    All at a thousand volts. (It is essential
    To keep the current at this high potential
    In spite of the considerable expense.)
        The Energy developed represents,
    Expressed in foot-tons, the united forces
    Of fifteen elephants and forty horses.
    But shall my scientific detail thus
    Clip the dear wings of Buoyant Pegasus?
        Shall pure statistics jar upon the ear
    That pants for Lyric accents loud and clear?
    Shall I describe the complex Dynamo
    Or write about its Commutator? No!
        To happier fields I lead my wanton pen,
    The proper study of mankind is men.
        Awake, my Muse! Portray the pleasing sight
    That meets us where they make Electric Light.
        Behold the Electrician where he stands:
    Soot, oil, and verdigris are on his hands;
    Large spots of grease defile his dirty clothes,
    The while his conversation drips with oaths.
    Shall such a being perish in its youth?
    Alas! it is indeed the fatal truth.
    In that dull brain, beneath that hair unkempt,
    Familiarity has bred contempt.
    We warn him of the gesture all too late:
    Oh, Heartless Jove! Oh, Adamantine Fate!
        A random touch--a hand’s imprudent slip--
    The Terminals--a flash--a sound like “Zip!”
    A smell of burning fills the started Air--
    The Electrician is no longer there!
        But let us turn with true Artistic scorn
    From facts funereal and from views forlorn
    Of Erebus and Blackest midnight born.[I]
        Arouse thee, Muse! and chaunt in accents rich
    The interesting processes by which
    The Electricity is passed along:
    These are my theme: to these I bend my song.
        It runs encased in wood or porous brick
    Through copper wires two millimetres thick,
    And insulated on their dangerous mission
    By indiarubber, silk, or composition.
    Here you may put with critical felicity
    The following question: “What is Electricity?”
        “Molecular Activity,” say some,
    Others when asked say nothing, and are dumb.
    Whatever be its nature, this is clear:
    The rapid current checked in its career,
    Baulked in its race and halted in its course[J]
    Transforms to heat and light its latent force:
        It needs no pedant in the lecturer’s chair
    To prove that light and heat are present there.
    The pear-shaped vacuum globe, I understand,
    Is far too hot to fondle with the hand.
    While, as is patent to the meanest sight,
    The carbon filament is very bright.
        As for the lights they hang about the town,
    Some praise them highly, others run them down.
    This system (technically called the Arc),
    Makes some passages too light, others too dark.
        But in the house the soft and constant rays
    Have always met with universal praise.
        For instance: if you want to read in bed
    No candle burns beside your curtain’s head,
    Far from some distant corner of the room
    The incandescent lamp dispels the gloom,
    And with the largest print need hardly try
    The powers of any young and vigorous eye.
        Aroint thee, Muse! Inspired the poet sings!
    I cannot help observing future things!
    Life is a vale, its paths are dark and rough
    Only because we do not know enough:
    When Science has discovered something more
    We shall be happier than we were before.
        Hail, Britain, Mistress of the Azure Main,
    Ten thousand Fleets sweep over thee in vain!
    Hail, Mighty Mother of the Brave and Free,
    That beat Napoleon, and gave birth to me!
    Thou that canst wrap in thine emblazoned robe
    One quarter of the habitable globe.
    Thy mountains, wafted by a favouring breeze,
    Like mighty rocks withstand the stormy seas.
        Thou art a Christian Commonwealth; and yet
    Be thou not all unthankful--nor forget
    As thou exultest in Imperial Might
    The Benefits of the Electric Light.




THE YELLOW MUSTARD


    Oh! ye that prink it to and fro,
    In pointed flounce and furbelow,
    What have ye known, what can ye know
    That have not seen the mustard grow?

    The yellow mustard is no less
    Than God’s good gift to loneliness;
    And he was sent in gorgeous press
    To jangle keys at my distress.

    I heard the throstle call again,
    Come hither, Pain! come hither, Pain!
    Till all my shameless feet were fain
    To wander through the summer rain.

    And far apart from human place,
    And flaming like a vast disgrace,
    There struck me blinding in the face
    The livery of the mustard race.

      *       *       *       *       *

    To see the yellow mustard grow
    Beyond the town, above, below;
    Beyond the purple houses, oh!
    To see the yellow mustard grow!




THE POLITICIAN OR THE IRISH EARLDOM


    A strong and striking Personality,
      Worth several hundred thousand pounds--
    Of strict political Morality--
      Was walking in his park-like Grounds;
    When, just as these began to pall on him
      (I mean the Trees, and Things like that),
    A Person who had come to call on him
      Approached him, taking off his Hat.

    He said, with singular veracity:
      “I serve our Sea-girt Mother-Land
    In no conspicuous capacity.
      I am but an Attorney; and
    I do a little elementary
      Negotiation, now and then,
    As Agent for a Parliamentary
      Division of the Town of N....

    “Merely as one of the Electorate--
      A member of the Commonweal--
    Before completing my Directorate,
      I want to know the way you feel
    On matters more or less debatable;
      As--whether our Imperial Pride
    Can treat as taxable or rateable
      The Gardens of....” His host replied:

    “The Ravages of Inebriety
      (Alas! increasing day by day!)
    Are undermining all Society.
      I do not hesitate to say
    My country squanders her abilities,
      Observe how Montenegro treats
    Her Educational Facilities....
... As to the African defeats,

    “I bitterly deplored their frequency;
      On Canada we are agreed,
    The Laws protecting Public Decency
      Are very, very lax indeed!
    The Views of most of the Nobility
      Are very much the same as mine,
    On Thingumbob’s eligibility....
      I trust that you remain to dine?”

    His Lordship pressed with importunity,
      As rarely he had pressed before.

      *       *       *       *       *

    It gave them both an opportunity
      To know each other’s value more.




THE LOSER


    He lost his money first of all
    --And losing that is half the story--
    And later on he tried a fall
      With Fate, in things less transitory.

    He lost his heart--and found it dead--
      (His one and only true discovery),
    And after that he lost his head,
      And lost his chances of recovery.

    He lost his honour bit by bit
      Until the thing was out of question.
    He worried so at losing it,
      He lost his sleep and his digestion.

    He lost his temper--and for good--
      The remnants of his reputation,
    His taste in wine, his choice of food,
      And then, in rapid culmination,

    His certitudes, his sense of truth,
      His memory, his self-control,
    The love that graced his early youth,
      And lastly his immortal soul.




III

SONGS




NOËL


        I

    On a winter’s night long time ago
        (_The bells ring loud and the bells ring low_),
    When high howled wind, and down fell snow
        (Carillon, Carilla).
    Saint Joseph he and Nostre Dame,
    Riding on an ass, full weary came
    From Nazareth into Bethlehem.
        And the small child Jesus smile on you.


II

    And Bethlehem inn they stood before
        (_The bells ring less and the bells ring more_),
    The landlord bade them begone from his door
        (Carillon, Carilla).
    “Poor folk” (says he), “must lie where they may,
    For the Duke of Jewry comes this way,
    With all his train on a Christmas Day.”
        And the small child Jesus smile on you.


III

    Poor folk that may my carol hear
        (_The bells ring single and the bells ring clear_),
    See! God’s one child had hardest cheer!
        (Carillon, Carilla).
    Men grown hard on a Christmas morn;
    The dumb beast by and a babe forlorn.
    It was very, very cold when our Lord was born.
        And the small child Jesus smile on you.


IV

    Now these were Jews as Jews must be
        (_The bells ring merry and the bells ring free_).
    But Christian men in a band are we
        (Carillon, Carilla).
    Empty we go, and ill be-dight,
    Singing Noël on a Winter’s night.
    Give us to sup by the warm firelight,
        And the small child Jesus smile on you.




THE BIRDS


    When Jesus Christ was four years old,
    The angels brought Him toys of gold,
    Which no man ever had bought or sold.

    And yet with these He would not play.
    He made Him small fowl out of clay,
    And blessed them till they flew away:
            _Tu creasti Domine_.

    Jesus Christ, Thou child so wise,
    Bless mine hands and fill mine eyes,
    And bring my soul to Paradise.




IN A BOAT


    Lady! Lady!
    Upon Heaven-height,
    Above the harsh morning
    In the mere light.

    Above the spindrift
    And above the snow,
    Where no seas tumble,
    And no winds blow.

    The twisting tides,
    And the perilous sands
    Upon all sides
    Are in your holy hands.

    The wind harries
    And the cold kills;
    But I see your chapel
    Over far hills.

    My body is frozen,
    My soul is afraid:
    Stretch out your hands to me,
    Mother and maid.

    Mother of Christ,
    And Mother of me,
    Save me alive
    From the howl of the sea.

    If you will Mother me
    Till I grow old,
    I will hang in your chapel
    A ship of pure gold.




SONG

     INVITING THE INFLUENCE OF A YOUNG LADY UPON THE OPENING YEAR


        I

    You wear the morning like your dress
    And are with mastery crowned;
    Whenas you walk your loveliness
    Goes shining all around.
    Upon your secret, smiling way
    Such new contents were found,
    The Dancing Loves made holiday
    On that delightful ground.


II

    Then summon April forth, and send
    Commandment through the flowers;
    About our woods your grace extend
    A queen of careless hours.
    For oh, not Vera veiled in rain,
    Nor Dian’s sacred Ring,
    With all her royal nymphs in train
    Could so lead on the Spring.




THE RING


    When I was flying before the King
    In the wood of Valognes in my hiding,
    Although I had not anything
    I sent a woman a golden ring.

    A Ring of the Moors beyond Leon
    With emerald and with diamond stone,
    And a writing no man ever had known,
    And an opal standing all alone.

    The shape of the ring the heart to bind:
    The emerald turns from cold to kind:
    The writing makes her sure to find:--
    But the evil opal changed her mind.

    Now when the King was dead, was he,
    I came back hurriedly over the sea
    From the long rocks in Normandy
    To Bosham that is by Selsey.
    And we clipt each other knee to knee.
    But what I had was lost to me.




CUCKOO!


    In woods so long time bare.
        Cuckoo!
    Up and in the wood, I know not where
    Two notes fall.
    Yet I do not envy him at all
    His phantasy.
    Cuckoo!
    I too,
    Somewhere,
    I have sung as merrily as he
    Who can dare,
    Small and careless lover, so to laugh at care,
    And who
    Can call
    Cuckoo!
    In woods of winter weary,
    In scented woods, of winter weary, call
    Cuckoo!
    In woods so long time bare.




THE LITTLE SERVING MAID


        I

    There was a Queen of England,
      And a good Queen too.
    She had a house in Powis Land
      With the Severn running through;
    And Men-folk and Women-folk
      Apprenticed to a trade;
    But the prettiest of all
      Was a Little Serving Maid.


II

    “Oh Madam, Queen of England!
      Oh will you let me go!
    For there’s a Lad in London
      And he would have it so.
    And I would have it too, Madam,
      And with him would I bide;
    And he will be the Groom, Madam,
      And I shall be the Bride!”


III

    “Oh fie to you and shame to you,
      You Little Serving Maid!
    And are you not astonied?
      And are you not afraid?
    For never was it known
      Since Yngelonde began
    That a Little Serving Maid
      Should go a-meeting of a man!


IV

    Then the Little Serving Maid
      She went and laid her down,
    With her cross and her bede,
      In her new courting gown.
    And she called in Mother Mary’s name
      And heavily she sighed:
    “I think that I have come to shame!”
      And after that she died.


        V

    The good Queen of England
      Her women came and ran:
    “The Little Serving Maid is dead
      From loving of a man!”
    Said the good Queen of England
      “That is ill news to hear!
    Take her out and shroud her,
      And lay her on a bier.”


VI

    They laid her on a bier,
      In the court-yard all;
    Some came from Foresting,
      And some came from Hall.
    And Great Lords carried her,
      And proud Priests prayed.
    And that was the end
      Of the Little Serving Maid.




AUVERGNAT


    There was a man was half a clown
      (It’s so my father tells of it).
    He saw the church in Clermont town
    And laughed to hear the bells of it.

    He laughed to hear the bells that ring
    In Clermont Church and round of it;
    He heard the verger’s daughter sing,
    And loved her for the sound of it.

    The verger’s daughter said him nay;
    She had the right of choice in it.
    He left the town at break of day:
    He hadn’t had a voice in it.

    The road went up, the road went down,
    And there the matter ended it.
    He broke his heart in Clermont town,
    At Pontgibaud they mended it.




DRINKING SONG

     ON THE EXCELLENCE OF BURGUNDY WINE


    My jolly fat host with your face all a-grin,
    Come, open the door to us, let us come in.
    A score of stout fellows who think it no sin
    If they toast till they’re hoarse, and they drink till they spin,
          Hoofed it amain,
          Rain or no rain,
    To crack your old jokes, and your bottles to drain.

    Such a warmth in the belly that nectar begets
    As soon as his guts with its humour he wets,
    The miser his gold, and the student his debts,
    And the beggar his rags and his hunger forgets.
          For there’s never a wine
          Like this tipple of thine
    From the great hill of Nuits to the River of Rhine.

    Outside you may hear the great gusts as they go
    By Foy, by Duerne, and the hills of Lerraulx,
    But the rain he may rain, and the wind he may blow,
    If the Devil’s above there’s good liquor below.
          So it abound,
          Pass it around,
        Burgundy’s Burgundy all the year round.




DRINKING DIRGE


    A thousand years ago I used to dine
      In houses where they gave me such regale
    Of dear companionship and comrades fine
      That out I went alone beyond the pale;
    And riding, laughed and dared the skies malign
      To show me all the undiscovered tale--
    But my philosophy’s no more divine,
      I put my pleasure in a pint of ale.

    And you, my friends, oh! pleasant friends of mine,
      Who leave me now alone, without avail,
    On Californian hills you gave me wine,
      You gave me cider-drink in Longuevaille;
    If after many years you come to pine
      For comradeship that is an ancient tale--
    You’ll find me drinking beer in Dead Man’s Chine.
      I put my pleasure in a pint of ale.

    In many a briny boat I’ve tried the brine,
      From many a hidden harbour I’ve set sail,
    Steering towards the sunset where there shine
      The distant amethystine islands pale.

    There are no ports beyond the far sea-line,
      Nor any halloa to meet the mariner’s hail;
    I stand at home and slip the anchor-line.
      I put my pleasure in a pint of ale.

ENVOI

    Prince! Is it true when you go out to dine
      You bring your bottle in a freezing pail?
    Why then you cannot be a friend of mine.
      _I_ put my pleasure in a pint of ale.




WEST SUSSEX DRINKING SONG


    They sell good Beer at Haslemere
      And under Guildford Hill.
    At Little Cowfold as I’ve been told
      A beggar may drink his fill:
    There is a good brew in Amberley too,
      And by the bridge also;
    But the swipes they take in at Washington Inn
      Is the very best Beer I know.


_Chorus._

      With my here it goes, there it goes,
        All the fun’s before us:
      The Tipple’s Aboard and the night is young,
      The door’s ajar and the Barrel is sprung,
      I am singing the best song ever was sung
        And it has a rousing chorus.

    If I were what I never can be,
      The master or the squire:
    If you gave me the hundred from here to the sea,
      Which is more than I desire:
    Then all my crops should be barley and hops,
      And did my harvest fail
    I’d sell every rood of mine acres I would
      For a belly-full of good Ale.


_Chorus._

    With my here it goes, there it goes,
      All the fun’s before us:
    The Tipple’s aboard and the night is young,
    The door’s ajar and the Barrel is sprung,
    I am singing the best song ever was sung
      And it has a rousing Chorus.




A BALLAD ON SOCIOLOGICAL ECONOMICS


    A while ago it came to pass
      (Merry we carol it all the day),
    There sat a man on the top of an ass
      (Heart be happy and carol be gay
        In spite of the price of hay).

    And over the down they hoofed it so
      (Happy go lucky has best of fare),
    The man up above and the brute below
      (And singing we all forget to care
        A man may laugh if he dare).

    Over the stubble and round the crop
      (Life is short and the world is round),
    The donkey beneath and the man on the top
      (Oh! let good ale be found, be found,
        Merry good ale and sound).

    It happened again as it happened before
      (Tobacco’s a boon but ale is bliss),
    The moke in the ditch and the man on the floor
      (And that is the moral to this, to this
        Remarkable artifice).




HERETICS ALL


    Heretics all, whoever you be,
    In Tarbes or Nimes, or over the sea,
    You never shall have good words from me.
      _Caritas non conturbat me._

    But Catholic men that live upon wine
    Are deep in the water, and frank, and fine;
    Wherever I travel I find it so,
      _Benedicamus Domino_.

    On childing women that are forlorn,
    And men that sweat in nothing but scorn:
    That is on all that ever were born,
      _Miserere Domine_.

    To my poor self on my deathbed,
    And all my dear companions dead,
    Because of the love that I bore them,
      _Dona Eis Requiem_.




HA’NACKER MILL


    Sally is gone that was so kindly
      Sally is gone from Ha’nacker Hill.
    And the Briar grows ever since then so blindly
      And ever since then the clapper is still,
      And the sweeps have fallen from Ha’nacker Mill

    Ha’nacker Hill is in Desolation:
      Ruin a-top and a field unploughed.
    And Spirits that call on a fallen nation
      Spirits that loved her calling aloud:
      Spirits abroad in a windy cloud.

    Spirits that call and no one answers;
      Ha’nacker’s down and England’s done.
    Wind and Thistle for pipe and dancers
      And never a ploughman under the Sun.
      Never a ploughman. Never a one.




TARANTELLA


    Do you remember an Inn,
    Miranda?
    Do you remember an Inn?
    And the tedding and the spreading
    Of the straw for a bedding,
    And the fleas that tease in the High Pyrenees,
    And the wine that tasted of the tar?
    And the cheers and the jeers of the young muleteers
    (Under the vine of the dark verandah)?
    Do you remember an Inn, Miranda,
    Do you remember an Inn?
    And the cheers and the jeers of the young muleteers
    Who hadn’t got a penny,
    And who weren’t paying any,
    And the hammer at the doors and the Din?
    And the Hip! Hop! Hap!
    Of the clap
    Of the hands to the twirl and the swirl
    Of the girl gone chancing,
    Glancing,
    Dancing,
    Backing and advancing,
    Snapping of the clapper to the spin
    Out and in----
    And the Ting, Tong, Tang of the Guitar!
    Do you remember an Inn,
    Miranda?
    Do you remember an Inn?

        Never more;
        Miranda,
        Never more.
        Only the high peaks hoar:
        And Aragon a torrent at the door.
        No sound
        In the walls of the Halls where falls
        The tread
        Of the feet of the dead to the ground
        No sound:
        But the boom
        Of the far Waterfall like Doom.




THE CHAUNTY OF THE “NONA”


        I

    Come list all ye Cullies and Doxies so dear,
    You shall hearken to the tale of the Bold Marineer
    That took ship out of Holyhead and drove her so hard
    Past Bardsey, Pwlheli, Port Madoc, and Fishguard--
    _Past Bardsey, Pwlheli, Port Madoc, and Fishguard_.


II

    Then he dropped out of Fishguard on a calm Summer’s day,
    By St David’s and Strumbles and across St Bride’s Bay;
    Circumnavigating Skomer, that Island, around,
    With the heart of a Lion he threaded Jack Sound--
    _With the heart of a Lion he threaded Jack Sound_.


III

    But from out the Main Ocean there rolled a great cloud,
    So he clawed into Milford Haven by the Fog Blast so loud,
    Until he dropped anchor in a deep-wooded bay,
    Where all night with Old Sleep and Quiet Sadness he lay--
    _Where all night with Old Sleep and Quiet Sadness he lay_.


IV

    Next morning was a Doldrum, and he whistled for a breeze,
    Which came from the N.N.W.’ard all across the high seas;
    And in passing St Govan’s lightship he gave them good night,
    But before it was morning he raised Lundy Light--
    _Before it was morning he had raised Lundy Light_.


        V

    Then he tossed for twelve hours in that horrible place
    Which is known to the Mariner as the Great White Horse Race,
    Till with a slant about three bells, or maybe near four,
    He saw white water breaking upon Loud Appledore--
    _He saw white water breaking upon Loud Appledore_.


VI

    The Pirates of Appledore, the Wines of Instow;
    But her nose is for Bideford with the tide at the flow.
    Rattle anchor, batten hatches, and leave your falls curled.
    The Long Bridge of Bideford is the end of the World--
    _The Long Bridge of Bideford is the end of the World_.




THE WINGED HORSE


        I

    It’s ten years ago to-day you turned me out o’ doors
    To cut my feet on flinty lands and stumble down the shores,
    And I thought about the all-in-all, oh more than I can tell!
    But I caught a horse to ride upon and I rode him very well,
    He had flame behind the eyes of him and wings upon his side.
                And I ride, and I ride!


II

    I rode him out of Wantage and I rode him up the hill,
    And there I saw the Beacon in the morning standing still,
    Inkpen and Hackpen and southward and away
    High through the middle airs in the strengthening of the day,
    And there I saw the channel-glint and England in her pride.
                And I ride, and I ride!


III

    And once a-top of Lambourne down toward the hill of Clere
    I saw the Host of Heaven in rank and Michael with his spear,
    And Turpin out of Gascony and Charlemagne the Lord,
    And Roland of the marches with his hand upon his sword
    For the time he should have need of it, and forty more beside.
                And I ride, and I ride!


IV

    For you that took the all-in-all the things you left were three.
    A loud voice for singing and keen eyes to see,
    And a spouting well of joy within that never yet was dried!
                And I ride.




STREPHON’S SONG

     (FROM “THE CRUEL SHEPHERDESS”)


    When I was not much older
    Than Cupid, but bolder,
    I asked of his Mother in passing her bower
    What it was in their blindness
    Men asked of her kindness
    And she said it was nought but a delicate flower:
    Such a delicate, delicate, delicate flower!

    This morning you kissed me,
    By noon you dismissed me
    As though such great things were the jest of one hour,
    And you left me still wondering
    If I were not too blundering
    To deal with that delicate, delicate flower:
    ’Tis such a delicate, delicate, delicate flower!

    For if that’s the complexion
    Of Ladies’ affection
    I must needs be a fool to remain in their power;
    But there’s that in me burning
    Which brings me returning
    To beg for the delicate, delicate flower;
    To implore for that delicate, delicate flower!




IV

BALLADES




SHORT BALLADE AND POSTSCRIPT ON CONSOLS AND BOERS


        I

    Gigantic daughter of the West
      (The phrase is Tennysonian), who
    From this unconquerable breast
      The vigorous milk of Freedom drew
   --We gave it freely--shall the crest
      Of Empire in your keeping true,
    Shall England--I forget the rest,
      But Consols are at 82.


II

    Now why should anyone invest,
      As even City people do
    (His Lordship did among the rest),
      When stocks--but what is that to you?
    And then, who ever could have guessed
      About the guns--and horses too!--
    Besides, they knew their business best,
      And Consols are at 82.


III

    It serves no purpose to protest,
      It isn’t manners to halloo
    About the way the thing was messed--
      Or vaguely call a man a Jew.
    A gentleman who cannot jest
      Remarked that we should muddle through
    (The continent was much impressed),
      And Consols are at 82.


_Envoi._

    And, Botha lay at Pilgrim’s Rest
      And Myberg in the Great Karroo
    (A desert to the south and west),
      And Consols are at 82.


_Postscript._

    Permit me--if you do not mind--
      To add it would be screaming fun
    If, after printing this, I find
      Them after all at 81.

    Or 70 or 63,
      Or 55 or 44,
    Or 39 and going free,
      Or 28--or even more.

    No matter--take no more advice
      From doubtful and intriguing men.
    Refuse the stuff at any price,
      And slowly watch them fall to 10.

    Meanwhile I feel a certain zest
      In writing once again the new
    Refrain that all is for the best,
      And Consols are at 82.


_Last Envoi._

    Prince, you and I were barely thirty-three,
      And now I muse and wonder if it’s true,
    That you were you and I myself was me,
      And 3 per cents were really 82!




BALLADE OF THE UNANSWERED QUESTION


        I

    What dwelling hath Sir Harland Pott
      That died of drinking in Bungay?
    Nathaniel Goacher who was shot
      Towards the end of Malplaquet?
    The only thing that we can say,
      (The only thing that has been said)
    About these gentlemen is, “Nay!
      But where are the unanswering dead”


II

    Lord Bumplepuppy, too, that got
      The knock from Messrs Dawkins’ dray?
    And Jonas, whom the Cachalot
      Begulphed in Esdraelon Bay?
    The Calvinistic John McKay,
      Who argued till his nostrils bled,
    And dropped in apoplexy? Nay!
      But where are the unanswering dead?


III

    And Heliodorus too, that hot
      Defender of the Roman sway;
    And He, the author of the “_Tot
      Mercedes dant Victoriæ_,”
    And all the armoured squadrons gay
      That ever glory nourishèd
    In all the world’s high charges? Nay!
      But where are the unanswering dead?


_Envoi_

    Prince, have you ever learnt to pray
      Upon your knees beside your bed?
    You miserable waxwork? Nay!
      But where are the unanswering dead?




BALLADE TO OUR LADY OF CZESTOCHOWA


        I

    Lady and Queen and Mystery manifold
      And very Regent of the untroubled sky,
    Whom in a dream St Hilda did behold
      And heard a woodland music passing by:
      You shall receive me when the clouds are high
    With evening and the sheep attain the fold.
    This is the faith that I have held and hold,
      And this is that in which I mean to die.


II

    Steep are the seas and savaging and cold
      In broken waters terrible to try;
    And vast against the winter night the wold,
      And harbourless for any sail to lie.
      But you shall lead me to the lights, and I
    Shall hymn you in a harbour story told.
    This is the faith that I have held and hold,
      And this is that in which I mean to die.


III

    Help of the half-defeated, House of gold,
      Shrine of the Sword, and Tower of Ivory;
    Splendour apart, supreme and aureoled,
      The Battler’s vision and the World’s reply.
      You shall restore me, O my last Ally,
    To vengeance and the glories of the bold.
    This is the faith that I have held and hold,
      And this is that in which I mean to die.


_Envoi_

    Prince of the degradations, bought and sold,
      These verses, written in your crumbling sty,
    Proclaim the faith that I have held and hold
      And publish that in which I mean to die.




BALLADE OF HELL AND OF MRS ROEBECK


        I

    I’m going out to dine at Gray’s
      With Bertie Morden, Charles and Kit,
    And Manderly who never pays,
      And Jane who wins in spite of it,
      And Algernon who won’t admit
    The truth about his curious hair
      And teeth that very nearly fit:--
    And Mrs Roebeck will be there.


II

    And then to-morrow someone says
      That someone else has made a hit
    In one of Mister Twister’s plays.
      And off we go to yawn at it;
      And when it’s petered out we quit
    For number 20, Taunton Square,
      And smoke, and drink, and dance a bit:--
    And Mrs Roebeck will be there.


III

    And so through each declining phase
      Of emptied effort, jaded wit,
    And day by day of London days
      Obscurely, more obscurely, lit;
      Until the uncertain shadows flit
    Announcing to the shuddering air
      A Darkening, and the end of it:--
    And Mrs Roebeck will be there.


_Envoi_

    Prince, on their iron thrones they sit,
      Impassible to our despair,
    The dreadful Guardians of the Pit:--
      And Mrs Roebeck will be there.




BALLADE OF UNSUCCESSFUL MEN


        I

    The cause of all the poor in ’93:
      The cause of all the world at Waterloo:
    The shouts of what was terrible and free
      Behind the guns of _Vengeance_ and her crew:
    The Maid that rode so straightly and so true
      And broke the line to pieces in her pride--
    They had to chuck it up; it wouldn’t do;
      The Devil didn’t like them, and they died.


II

    Cæsar and Alexander shall agree
      That right athwart the world their bugles blew:
    And all the lads that marched in Lombardy
      Behind the young Napoleon charging through:
    All that were easy swordsmen, all that slew
      The Monsters, and that served our God and tried
    The temper of this world--they lost the clue.
      The Devil didn’t like them, and they died.


III

    You, the strong sons of anger and the sea,
      What darkness on the wings of battle flew?
    Then the great dead made answer: “Also we
      With Nelson found oblivion: Nelson, who
    When cheering out of port in spirit grew
      To be one purpose with the wind and tide--
    Our nameless hulks are sunk and rotted through:
      The Devil didn’t like us and we died.”


_Envoi_

    Prince, may I venture (since it’s only you)
      To speak discreetly of The Crucified?
    He was extremely unsuccessful too:
      The Devil didn’t like Him, and He died.




BALLADE OF THE HERESIARCHS


        I

    John Calvin whose peculiar fad
      It was to call God murderous,
    Which further led that feverish cad
      To burn alive the Servetus.
    The horrible Bohemian Huss,
      The tedious Wycliffe, where are they?
    But where is old Nestorius?
      The wind has blown them all away.


II

    The Kohen out of Novdograd
      Who argued from the Roman Jus
    “_Privata fasta nihil ad
      Rem nisi sint de sacribus_.”
    And Hume, who made a dreadful fuss
      About the Resurrection Day
    And said it was ridiculous--
      The wind has blown them all away.


III

    Of Smith the gallant Mormon lad
      That took of wives an over-plus:
    Johanna Southcott who was mad
      And nasty Nietzsche, who was worse.
    Of Tolstoy, the Eccentric Russ,
      Our strong Posterity shall say:
    “Lord Jesus! What are these to us?
      The wind has blown them all away!”


_Envoi_

    Prince, should you meet upon a bus
      A man who makes a great display
    Of Dr Haeckel, argue thus:--
      The wind has blown them all away.




        V

EPIGRAMS


        I

_On His Books_

    When I am dead, I hope it may be said:
    “His sins were scarlet, but his books were read.”


II

_On Noman, a Guest_

    Dear Mr Noman, does it ever strike you,
    The more we see of you, the less we like you?


III

_A Trinity_

    Of three in One and One in three
    My narrow mind would doubting be
    Till Beauty, Grace and Kindness met
    And all at once were Juliet


IV

_On Torture, a Public Singer_

    Torture will give a dozen pence or more
    To keep a drab from bawling at his door.
    The public taste is quite a different thing--
    Torture is positively paid to sing.


        V

_On Paunch, a Parasite_

    Paunch talks against good liquor to excess,
    And then about his raving Patroness;
    And then he talks about himself. And then
    We turn the conversation on to men.


VI

_On Hygiene_

    Of old when folk lay sick and sorely tried
    The doctors gave them physic, and they died.
    But here’s a happier age: for now we know
    Both how to make men sick and keep them so.


VII

_On Lady Poltagrue, a Public Peril_

    The Devil, having nothing else to do,
    Went off to tempt My Lady Poltagrue.
    My Lady, tempted by a private whim,
    To his extreme annoyance, tempted him.


VIII

_The Mirror_

    The mirror held your fair, my Fair,
    A fickle moment’s space.
    You looked into mine eyes, and there
    For ever fixed your face.

    Keep rather to your looking-glass
    Than my more faithful eyes:
    It told the truth--Alas! my lass,
    My constant memory lies.


IX

_The Elm_

    This is the place where Dorothea smiled.
    I did not know the reason, nor did she.
    But there she stood, and turned, and smiled at me:
    A sudden glory had bewitched the child.
    The corn at harvest, and a single tree.
    This is the place where Dorothea smiled.


        X

_The Telephone_

    To-night in million-voicèd London I
    Was lonely as the million-pointed sky
    Until your single voice. Ah! So the Sun
    Peoples all heaven, although he be but one.


XI

_The Statue_

    When we are dead, some Hunting-boy will pass
    And find a stone half-hidden in tall grass
    And grey with age: but having seen that stone
    (Which was your image), ride more slowly on.


XII

_Epitaph on the Favourite Dog of a Politician_

    Here lies a Dog: may every Dog that dies
    Lie in security--as this Dog lies.


XIII

_Epitaph on the Politician Himself_

    Here richly, with ridiculous display,
    The Politician’s corpse was laid away.
    While all of his acquaintance sneered and slanged
    I wept: for I had longed to see him hanged.


XIV

_Another on the Same_

    This, the last ornament among the peers,
    Bribed, bullied, swindled and blackmailed for years:
    But Death’s what even Politicians fail
    To bribe or swindle, bully or blackmail.


XV

_On Mundane Acquaintances_

    Good morning, Algernon: Good morning, Percy.
    Good morning, Mrs Roebeck. Christ have mercy!


XVI

_On a Rose for Her Bosom_

    Go, lovely rose, and tell the lovelier fair
    That he which loved her most was never there.


XVII

_On the Little God_

    Of all the gods that gave me all their glories
    To-day there deigns to walk with me but one.
    I lead him by the hand and tell him stories.
    It is the Queen of Cyprus’ little son.


XVIII

_On a Prophet_

    Of old ’twas Samuel sought the Lord: to-day
    The Lord runs after Samuel--so they say.


XIX

_On a Dead Hostess_

    Of this bad world the loveliest and the best
    Has smiled and said “Good Night,” and gone to rest.


XX

_On a Great Election_

    The accursèd power which stands on Privilege
    (And goes with Women, and Champagne and Bridge)
    Broke--and Democracy resumed her reign:
    (Which goes with Bridge, and Women and Champagne).


XXI

_On a Mistaken Mariner_

    He whistled thrice to pass the Morning Star,
    Thinking that near which was so very far.
    So I, whenas I meet my Dearest Dear,
    Still think that far which is so very near.


XXII

_On a Sleeping Friend_

    Lady, when your lovely head
    Droops to sink among the Dead,
    And the quiet places keep
    You that so divinely sleep;
    Then the dead shall blessèd be
    With a new solemnity,
    For such Beauty, so descending,
    Pledges them that Death is ending.
    Sleep your fill--but when you wake
    Dawn shall over Lethe break.


XXIII

_Fatigued_

    I’m tired of Love: I’m still more tired of Rhyme.
    But Money gives me pleasure all the time.


XXIV

_On Benicia, who Wished Him Well_

    Benicia wished me well; I wished her well.
    And what I wished her more I may not tell.


XXV

_The False Heart_

    I said to Heart, “How goes it?” Heart replied:
    “Right as a Ribstone Pippin!” But it lied.


XXVI

_Partly from the Greek_

    She would be as the stars in your sight
    That turn in the endless hollow;
    That tremble, and always follow
    The quiet wheels of the Night.




VI

THE BALLAD OF VAL-ÈS-DUNES

     THE VICTORY OF WILLIAM THE CONQUEROR IN HIS YOUTH OVER THE REBELS
     AT VAL-ÈS-DUNES IN THE YEAR 1047


     [This piece of verse is grossly unhistorical. Val-ès-Dunes is not
     on the sea but inland. No Norman blazoned a shield or a church
     window in the middle eleventh century, still less would he frame
     one in silver, and I doubt gilt spurs. It was not the young Bastard
     of Falaise, but the men of the King in Paris that really won the
     battle. There was nothing Scandinavian left in Normandy, and
     whatever there had been five generations before was slight. The
     Colentin had no more Scandinavian blood than the rest. There is no
     such place as Longuevaile. There is a Hauteville, but it has no bay
     and had nothing to do with the Harcourts, and the Harcourts were
     not of Bloodroyal--and so forth.]


        I

    The men that lived in Longuevaile
      Came out to fight by bands.
    They jangled all in welded mail,
    Their shields were rimmed of silver pale
    And blazoned like a church-vitrail:
      Their swords were in their hands.
    But the harsh raven of the Old Gods
      Was on the rank sea-sands.

        _There rose a wind on heath and den:_
          _The sky went racing grey._
        _The Bastard and his wall of men_
          _Were a charger’s course away._


II

    The Old Gods of the Northern Hall
      Are in their narrow room.
    Their thrones are flanked of spearmen tall,
    The three that have them in their thrall,
    Sit silently before them all,
      They weave upon their loom;
    And round about them as they weave
      The Scalds sing doom.


III

    The Bastard out of Normandy
      Was angry for his wrong.
    His eyes were virginal to see,
    For nothing in his heart had he
    But a hunger for his great degree;
      And his back was broad and strong
    As are the oxen of the field,
      That pull the ploughs along.


IV

    He saw that column of cavalry wheel,
      Split outward, and deploy.
    He heard, he heard the Oliphant peal.
    He crooked an angry knee to feel
    The scabbard against his gilded heel.
      He had great joy:
    And he stood upright in the stirrup steel.
      Because he was a boy.

      *       *       *       *       *

        _We faced their ordering, all the force,_
          _And there was little sound;_
        _But Haribert-Le-Marshall’s horse_
          _Pawed heavily the ground._


        V

    As the broad ships out of Barbary
      Come driving from the large,
    With yards a-bend and courses free,
    And tumbling down their decks a-lee,
    The hurrahing of the exultant sea,
      So drave they to the charge.
    But the harsh raven of the Old Gods
      Was on the rank sea-marge.


VI

    The Old Gods of the Northern Hall
      Are crownéd for the tomb.
    Their biers are flanked of torches tall,
    And through the flames that leap and fall
    There comes a droning and a call
      To the night’s womb,
    As the tide beneath a castle wall
      Goes drumming through the gloom.


VII

    They tonsured me but Easter year,
      I swore to Christ and Rome.
    My name is not mine older name....
    But ah! to see them as they came,
    With thundering and with points aflame,
      I smelt foam.
    And my heart was like a wandering man’s,
    Who piles his boat on Moorna sands
      And serves a slave in alien lands,
    And then beneath a harper’s hands
      Hears suddenly of home.

      *       *       *       *       *

        _For their cavalry came in a curling leaf,_
          _They shouted as they drave,_
        _And the Bastard’s line was like a reef_
          _But theirs was like a wave._


VIII

    As the broad ships out of Barbary
      Strike rock.
    And the stem shatters, and the sail flaps;
    Streaming seaward; and the taut shroud snaps,
    And the block
      Clatters to the deck of the wreck.
    So did the men of Longuevaile
    Take the shock.


IX

    Our long line quivered but it did not break,
      It countered and was strong.
    The first bolt went through the wind with a wail,
    And another and a-many with a thudding on the mail;
    Pattered all the arrows in an April hail;
      Whistled the ball and thong:
    And I, the priest, with that began
      The singing of my song.


        X

    Press inward, inward, Normandy;
      Press inward, Cleres and Vaux;
    Press inward, Mons and Valery;
      Press inward, Yvetot.
    Stand hard the men of the Beechen Ford
    (Oh! William of Falaise, my lord!)
    Battle is a net and a struggle in a cord.
      Battle is a wrestler’s throw.
    The middle holding as the wings made good,
    The far wings closing as the centre stood.
    Battle is a mist and battle is a wood,
      And battle is won so.


XI

    The fishermen fish in the River of Seine,
      They haul the long nets in.
    They haul them in and they haul again,
    (The fishermen fish in the River of Seine)
    They haul them in and they haul again,
      A million glittering fin:
    With the hauling in of our straining ends
      That Victory did begin.


XII

    The tall son of the Seven Winds
      Galloped hot-foot from the Hither Hithe.
    So strongly went he down the press,
    Almost he did that day redress
    With his holping and his hardiness,
      For his sword was like a scythe
    In Arques when the grass is high,
    And all the swaithes in order lie,
    And there’s the bailiff standing by--
      A gathering of the tithe.


XIII

    And now, go forward, Normandy,
      Go forward all in one.
    The press was caught and trampled and it broke
    From the sword and its swinger and the axe’s stroke,
    Pouring through the gap in a whirl of smoke
      As a blinded herd will run.
    And so fled many and a very few
    With mounts all spent would staggering pursue,
    But the race fell scattered as the evening grew:
      The battle was over and done.

      *       *       *       *       *

        _Like birds against the reddening day_
          _They dwindled one by one,_
        _And I heard a trumpet far away_
          _At the setting of the sun._

      *       *       *       *       *


XIV

    The stars were in the Eternal Sky,
      It was calm in Massared;
    Richard, Abbot of Leclair, and I
    And a Picard Priest that held on high
      A Torch above his head;
    We stumbled through the darkening land
    Assoiling with anointed hand
      The dying and the dead.


XV

    How many in the tufted grass,
      How many dead there lay.
    For there was found the Fortenbras
    And young Garain of Hault, alas!
    And the Wardens of the Breton pass
      Who were lords of his array,
    And Hugh that trusted in his glass
      But came not home the day.


XVI

    I saw the miller of Martindall,
      I saw that archer die.
    The blunt quarrel caught him at the low white wall,
    And he tossed up his arrow to the Lord God of all,
    But long before the first could fall
      His soul was in the sky.


XVII

    The last of all the lords that sprang
      From Harcourt of the Crown,
    He parried with the shield and the silver rang,
    But the axe fell heavy on the helm with a clang
    And the girths parted and the saddle swang,
      And he went down:
    He never more sang winter songs
      In his high town.


XVIII

    In his high town that Faëry is,
      And stands on Harcourt bay,
    The fisher surging through the night
    Takes bearing by that castle height,
    And moors him harboured in the bight,
      And watches for the day.
    But with the broadening of the light,
      It vanishes away.


XIX

    In his high town that Faëry is,
      And stands on Harcourt Lea.
    To summon him up his arrier-ban,
    His writ beyond the mountains ran;
    My father was his serving man,
      Although the farm was free.
    Before the angry wars began
      He was a friend to me.


XX

    The night before the boy was born
      There came a Priest who said
    That he had seen red Aldeborn,
    The star of hate in Taurus’ horn,
    Which glared above a field of corn,
      And covered him with dread.
    I wish to God I had not held
      The cloth in which he bled.

      *       *       *       *       *


XXI

    The Horse from Cleres and Valery,
      The foot from Yvetot,
    And all the men of the Harbour Towns
      That live by fall and flow.
    And all the men of the Beechen Ford
   --Oh! William of Falaise, my lord!--
    And all the sails in Michael’s ward,
    And all the shields of Caux,
      Shall follow you out across the world,
      With sword and lance and bow,
    To Beachy and to Pevensey Bar,
      To Chester through the snow,
    With sack and pack and camping tent,
      A-grumbling as they go:
    My lord is William of Falaise.
      Haro!


FOOTNOTES:

[A]

    But do not think I shall explain
      To any great extent. Believe me,
    I partly write to give you pain,
      And if you do not like me, leave me.


[B]

    And least of all can you complain,
      Reviewers, whose unholy trade is,
    To puff with all your might and main
      Biographers of single ladies.


[C] Never mind.

[D]

    The plan forgot (I know not how,
      Perhaps the Refectory filled it),
    To put a chapel in; and now
      We’re mortgaging the rest to build it.


[E] To be pronounced as a monosyllable in the Imperial fashion.

[F] Mr Punt, Mr Howl, and Mr Grewcock (now, alas, deceased).

[G] A neat rendering of “Sublimi feriam sidera vertice.”

[H] To the Examiners: These facts (of which I guarantee the accuracy)
were given me by a Director.

[I] A reminiscence of Milton: “Fas est et ab hoste docere.”

[J] Lambkin told me he regretted this line, which was for the sake of
Rhyme. He would willingly have replaced it, but to his last day could
construct no substitute.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sonnets and Verse, by Hilaire Belloc

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONNETS AND VERSE ***

***** This file should be named 60663-0.txt or 60663-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/6/6/60663/

Produced by Tim Lindell, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
